---
layout: post
title:  "Phnom Penh and the Cross: Part I"
permalink: /pp1/
date:   2023-12-18
categories: jekyll update
---

James

The principal of Cross Academy[^1], where I would be teaching, met me at the airport. It was my first time in Phnom Penh, Cambodia’s capital.

“It’s a welcome gift!” he said, handing me a SIM card.

We left the airport in the principal’s red Prius. 

Immediately, it was like I entered a movie set of the sixties in Korea. Old mopeds (which Cambodians, after the French, call moto) everywhere, mounted with Cambodians and their families, sometimes three or four people at a time—no Westerner in sight—large patches of land rendered unlivable by tall weeds and piles of trash—small fires here and there—street vendors in sandals holding tongs in front of charcoal grills, cooking meat dripping with thick sauces, sending clouds of savory smoke everywhere—kids, maybe thirteen, smoking cigarettes—toddlers without shirts or pants—elementary school children driving motos with their little siblings in the backseat—women in Louis Vuitton-knockoff pajamas drying fish in the hot sun—seasoned baby oysters for sale on wooden, moto-driven carts—skinny cats with round tails picking at dirty round containers set in front of every building for trash disposal—street dogs lying in the shade on their bellies, legs spread out on the ground like frogs, eyes-closed, tongues out, sleeping peacefully beside the crowds of people and motos kicking up dust and dirt and every sort of debris—run-down buildings—sheets of metal for walls and roofs—groups of monks in orange robes in their slow, measured gait—people bowing low to them with hands together under their noses, appropriate toward monks in the hierarchy of bows—huge, rickety eighteen-wheelers zooming past, making their way from factories to the city and back—honking at every turn—complete disregard of the faded lanes. 

The principal and I crept slowly to the school dorm I’d be staying at, motos weaving through the cars, barely not scratching them, like a colony of ants in organized chaos, or like the lanes of Costco, but in place of metal carts that, at worst, bump into your ankles, there are motos and old Japanese cars and industrial trucks that can end your life immediately. 

There’s an equilibrium that you begin to understand after a period of initial shock which feels like brushes with death every moment on the road. Cars inch slowly forward while motos find and occupy any available gap. Motos are always going up and down the curb of sidewalks that are inhospitable to pedestrians, who are few. “There’re no rules,” a Cambodian friend told me, laughing. You can drive without a license if your moto’s engine has a volume of less than 150cc, which is most motos. But, funny enough, I feel safer in Phnom Penh traffic than on the roads of Los Angeles or Boston. (So much for first-world bureaucracy!)

But the first drive on the Phnom Penh road was a shock. Between gawking, irregular breathing, a racing heart, jumping from the seat here and there, nervous laughter, and silent but desperate prayers for protection, I got to know the principal. 
<center>&#42;</center>
“A Harvard student!” the principal said, driving steadily through the traffic. “The students are dying to meet you!” 

He got excited easily. He was warm and encouraging and knew how to talk people up. He had lived there for about two decades, working in various industries, often as a consultant. He knew the place like a local though his Khmer, the Cambodian language, was not very good. He summed up his career, saying, “I’ve done everything there is to do except for making money.” In his fifties, he felt that his calling was in education and took the offer to head a K-12 school founded by one of his clients, Elder Kim.

“You can easily make a hundred thousand in Gangnam,” he said. “What made you want to come here?” 

I gave him the elevator-pitch version of the story. Like the principal, I had explored a lot, but came out of each experience with the suffocating feeling that none of it mattered.

I had no expectations with Cambodia. I knew nothing about Cambodia besides the presence of cockroaches—the fat, tropical type—fried spiders, and Angkor Wat, one of the seven wonders of the world. Google “Cambodia” and you get images of Hindu-Buddhist temples. “Is *that* where you want to be?” my older brother asked when I visited him before I left at his 27th floor studio near Columbus Circle. Yes, life would be different, but the beautiful temples were not the hardest thing about Cambodia.

Westerners say Cambodia is a romantic country, a spiritual country. But Cambodia has its dark side: the 1975-1979 genocide perpetrated by Pol Pot’s Khmer Rouge communists, whose cause gained support and ultimately total control in large part due to the bombing operations headed by Kissinger and Nixon in the sixties. Through the work of the then small Khmer Communist Party, the rural population became more and more extremist and united under the vision of anti-colonialist, agrarian communism. Among the two million murdered in the genocide were nearly all of the intellectual and social elite—doctors, teachers, professors, engineers, anyone, we remember, with glasses—except for the communists who survived the paranoid internal purges and those who survived the brutal forced labor camps in the provinces. The aftermath was a tight grip on power by Hun Sen, whose son Hun Manet recently took the position of prime minister after his father was in power for thirty-eight years. 
But these things I would come to know in the seven months I stayed in Phnom Penh and afterward. In the principal’s red Prius, I was still in my own head.

“A chef, a Harvard student, a musician, a jack of all trades looks for meaning in Cambodia…” he said, savoring the details.

“In the time that you are here,” he continued, serious now, “I hope you can find the dream and meaning you are looking for.” 

-

Notes:

[^1]: Names of people and places have been changed for reasons of privacy.